README.md, before:

# install-gentoo

[![pipeline status](https://gitlab.com/alexhaydock/ansible-gentoo/badges/master/pipeline.svg)](https://gitlab.com/alexhaydock/ansible-gentoo/-/commits/master)

This is a learning project to see whether I could actually achieve the feat of automating an entire stage3 tarball based install of Gentoo with Ansible. Please feel free to copy, modify or use it, but don't expect it to be bug-free or work entirely as expected.

Thanks to [jameskyle/ansible-gentoo](https://github.com/jameskyle/ansible-gentoo) for some of the code in the disks/filesystem roles.

![Screenshot of installed Gentoo system with GNOME3](https://gitlab.com/alexhaydock/ansible-gentoo/raw/master/screenshot.png)

### Project Scope
This project loosely follows the Gentoo Handbook and configures a stage3 Gentoo install as follows:
* Partitioning disks
* Creating/mounting filesystems
* Downloading and deploying a stage3 tarball
* Entering the chroot
* Downloading an emerge snapshot and running `emerge --sync`
* Downloading and building the Kernel from source
* Configuring relevant OS services and networking
* Installing GRUB bootloader to primary disk
* Installing GNOME, X.Org and other relevant applications
* Creating users
* (and just generally provisioning a full working desktop environment)

### What I learned from this project (and why you should try it too!)
I wanted to start a project based around a Gentoo Linux system, as Gentoo is notable for taking a very 'bring your own OS' approach to Linux. As a user, you build your own system exactly how you want it, bringing your own kernel, init system, bootloader, window manager & desktop environment, and applications.

Over the years, Gentoo has gained quite a reputation within tech culture, with the ["Install Gentoo"](https://knowyourmeme.com/memes/install-gentoo) meme spawning from a widely-held belief that the installation process is particularly difficult and laborious. In reality, the documentation behind Gentoo (particularly the [Gentoo Handbook](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/Handbook:AMD64)) is quite comprehensive and easy to follow. Even a relatively-new user should be able to get a system up and running by following the handbook's instructions closely.

With my project, I hoped that learning to automate the build process of a system in this way would teach me more about how Linux systems function and fit together than any course or YouTube tutorial would. However, copy-and-paste does not a guru make, so I decided that merely following the handbook to the letter wasn't going to cut it for my project. I wanted to build myself a functional but *modern* system.

Gentoo is rare among modern Linux distributions in that it still provides first-class support for the OpenRC init system (a.k.a. the old way of doing things). This is what is targeted in the Handbook, and most of the instructions available on the Wiki for other packages assume you are running OpenRC. All is not lost, however, for denizens of planet Red Hat, as Gentoo does make `systemd` available if the user wants to use it. All of the other components of a "next-gen" Linux system are available too: Wayland, `systemd-boot`.

So I decided my direction for the project would be to build out a system using the handbook's suggested setup. After building and automating the handbook's suggested config (over and over, until it works), I started experimenting with switching out the old-hat components that Gentoo suggests for their fancy modern equivalents. I would switch out OpenRC for systemd, then `grub` for `systemd-boot`, then X.Org for Wayland. Even the smaller changes, like migrating from editing `/etc/conf.d/hostname` and `/etc/hosts` to using `hostnamectl`. You get the idea.

It's worth noting that you might not actually *want* all of these next-gen components in your system. Next-gen does not always mean "ready", and that's certainly something I discovered along the way. But the idea was not to build myself a next-gen system I actually wanted to use. After all, I could just use [Fedora](https://getfedora.org/) for that. I simply wanted to teach myself more about how systems like this are glued together 'under the hood'.

Anyway, as I'd hoped, I learned a lot from this project, and I can fully recommend it for anyone interested in lifting the curtain on how a Linux distribution actually fits together.

### Known issues / things to bear in mind
* The default users are `user:password` and `root:root-password`, which aren't great and will need changing after install.
* The initial `install.yml` playbook isn't quite fully idempotent, which is generally considered bad Ansible practice. I've tried to control for this by adding checkpoints that write files into `/tmp` as we run through the playbook, recording which steps we've successfully run and making it easier to iterate on the playbook for development.
* This setup uses `systemd`. There is no simple way to switch this to OpenRC, but I might consider it in the future.
* There is no LSM active. There is an `eselect profile` with SELinux which I may attempt to use in the future.
* This is also not Hardened Gentoo, but I will consider that `eselect profile` too.
* You need at least 4GB RAM to build a proper system with GNOME. Once it gets to building bits like Webkit and Spidermonkey, it will happily shoot up to 4.5GB+ used. So really 8GB is a bare minimum for building a desktop based on Gentoo unless you want to be grinding swap all day.
* This will probably take **ages** to run. Especially if you include the Firefox package. My development machine is admittedly showing its age now, but it takes about 12 hours to finish a Packer run for this system. (It's a **huge** amount faster when not building Firefox).

---

## Building a local VM with Packer (recommended)

### Pre-reqs
* Ansible
* Packer
* VirtualBox
* Nothing listening on port `6666` already on your system (the VM will listen for SSH connections on this port while building).

### Note on Packer and SSH client config
If you experience an error where Ansible is unable to connect, then ensure your `~/.ssh/config` is not too restrictive when it comes to key exchange algorithms and ciphers.

A resonable `~/.ssh/config` snippet for this:
```
Host 127.0.0.1
    HostKeyAlgorithms ssh-ed25519-cert-v01@openssh.com,ssh-ed25519,ssh-rsa,ssh-dss
    Ciphers chacha20-poly1305@openssh.com,aes128-ctr,aes256-ctr
```

### Building a VM with Packer
```sh
packer build -on-error=ask packer.json
```

### Packer Quirks
Looking at [the Packer template](https://gitlab.com/alexhaydock/ansible-gentoo/-/blob/master/packer.json) in this repo, you will probably find it to be a bit more rigid than Packer 'best practices'. I have to specify a VirtualBox NAT port for SSH manually, and the Ansible playbook is being run with the [local shell provisioner](https://packer.io/docs/provisioners/shell-local.html) instead of the probably more-appropriate [Ansible provisioner](https://packer.io/docs/provisioners/ansible.html).

The Ansible provisioner for Packer passes `IdentitiesOnly=yes` to the `ansible-playbook` command (to avoid SSH auth failure caused by trying every key the user might have inside `~/.ssh`). Under normal circumstances this would be sensible, but it causes problems here since we're essentially provisioning two machines. (One being the LiveCD where we connect via SSH and install Gentoo into a chroot, and the other being the installed system we then connect to continue setup.)

---

## Installing to a remote host over SSH

### Pre-reqs (remote host)
* Remote host, booted to the latest [Gentoo Minimal Installation CD](https://www.gentoo.org/downloads/).
* An ethernet connection, up and capable of DHCP.
* SSH, started and running on the Gentoo LiveCD:
  * `/etc/init.d/sshd start`
* A password set for the `root` account:
  * `passwd root`
  * If you use `root-password` as the password, this playbook will run without modification.

### Pre-reqs (local host)
* Ansible
* Local `inventory.ini` file for Ansible to use configured to use the DHCP address of our remote server.
* Edit the `group_vars/all/main.yml` file to set any variables which need setting.
  * In particular, `firmware_type` must be set to either `bios` or `efi`. Setting this wrong may leave your system unbootable or, more likely, the GRUB installation step will simply fail.

### Invoke installation with Ansible
Deploy the first stage of installation (targets the booted LiveCD) with:
```sh
make install
```

and then, once the system is installed and the remote host has rebooted:
```sh
make postinstall
```

Commit message:

Numerous updates to improve robustness of chroot install stage

README.md, after:

# install-gentoo

[![pipeline status](https://gitlab.com/alexhaydock/ansible-gentoo/badges/master/pipeline.svg)](https://gitlab.com/alexhaydock/ansible-gentoo/-/commits/master)

This is a learning project to see whether I could actually achieve the feat of automating an entire stage3 tarball based install of Gentoo with Ansible. Please feel free to copy, modify or use it, but don't expect it to be bug-free or work entirely as expected.

Thanks to [jameskyle/ansible-gentoo](https://github.com/jameskyle/ansible-gentoo) for some of the code in the disks/filesystem roles.

![Screenshot of installed Gentoo system with GNOME3](https://gitlab.com/alexhaydock/ansible-gentoo/raw/master/screenshot.png)

### Project Scope
This project loosely follows the Gentoo Handbook and configures a stage3 Gentoo install as follows:
* Partitioning disks
* Creating/mounting filesystems
* Downloading and deploying a stage3 tarball
* Entering the chroot
* Downloading an emerge snapshot and running `emerge --sync`
* Downloading and building the Kernel from source
* Configuring relevant OS services and networking
* Installing GRUB bootloader to primary disk
* Installing GNOME, X.Org and other relevant applications
* Creating users
* (and just generally provisioning a full working desktop environment)

### What I learned from this project (and why you should try it too!)
I wanted to start a project based around a Gentoo Linux system, as Gentoo is notable for taking a very 'bring your own OS' approach to Linux. As a user, you build your own system exactly how you want it, bringing your own kernel, init system, bootloader, window manager & desktop environment, and applications.

Over the years, Gentoo has gained quite a reputation within tech culture, with the ["Install Gentoo"](https://knowyourmeme.com/memes/install-gentoo) meme spawning from a widely-held belief that the installation process is particularly difficult and laborious. In reality, the documentation behind Gentoo (particularly the [Gentoo Handbook](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/Handbook:AMD64)) is quite comprehensive and easy to follow. Even a relatively-new user should be able to get a system up and running by following the handbook's instructions closely.

With my project, I hoped that learning to automate the build process of a system in this way would teach me more about how Linux systems function and fit together than any course or YouTube tutorial would. However, copy-and-paste does not a guru make, so I decided that merely following the handbook to the letter wasn't going to cut it for my project. I wanted to build myself a functional but *modern* system.

Gentoo is rare among modern Linux distributions in that it still provides first-class support for the OpenRC init system (a.k.a. the old way of doing things). This is what is targeted in the Handbook, and most of the instructions available on the Wiki for other packages assume you are running OpenRC. All is not lost, however, for denizens of planet Red Hat, as Gentoo does make `systemd` available if the user wants to use it. All of the other components of a "next-gen" Linux system are available too: Wayland, `systemd-boot`.

So I decided my direction for the project would be to build out a system using the handbook's suggested setup. After building and automating the handbook's suggested config (over and over, until it works), I started experimenting with switching out the old-hat components that Gentoo suggests for their fancy modern equivalents. I would switch out OpenRC for systemd, then `grub` for `systemd-boot`, then X.Org for Wayland. Even the smaller changes, like migrating from editing `/etc/conf.d/hostname` and `/etc/hosts` to using `hostnamectl`. You get the idea.

It's worth noting that you might not actually *want* all of these next-gen components in your system. Next-gen does not always mean "ready", and that's certainly something I discovered along the way. But the idea was not to build myself a next-gen system I actually wanted to use. After all, I could just use [Fedora](https://getfedora.org/) for that. I simply wanted to teach myself more about how systems like this are glued together 'under the hood'.

Anyway, as I'd hoped, I learned a lot from this project, and I can fully recommend it for anyone interested in lifting the curtain on how a Linux distribution actually fits together.

### Known issues / things to bear in mind
* The default users are `user:password` and `root:root-password`, which aren't great and will need changing after install.
* The initial `install.yml` playbook isn't quite fully idempotent, which is generally considered bad Ansible practice. I've tried to control for this by adding checkpoints that write files into `/tmp` as we run through the playbook, recording which steps we've successfully run and making it easier to iterate on the playbook for development.
* This setup uses `systemd`. There is no simple way to switch this to OpenRC, but I might consider it in the future.
* There is no LSM active. There is an `eselect profile` with SELinux which I may attempt to use in the future.
* This is also not Hardened Gentoo, but I will consider that `eselect profile` too.
* You need at least 4GB RAM to build a proper system with GNOME. Once it gets to building bits like Webkit and Spidermonkey, it will happily shoot up to 4.5GB+ used. So really 8GB is a bare minimum for building a desktop based on Gentoo unless you want to be grinding swap all day.
* This will probably take **ages** to run. Especially if you include the Firefox package. My development machine is admittedly showing its age now, but it takes about 12 hours to finish a Packer run for this system. (It's a **huge** amount faster when not building Firefox).

---

## Building a local VM with Packer (recommended)

### Pre-reqs
* Ansible
* Packer
* VirtualBox
* Nothing listening on port `6666` already on your system (the VM will listen for SSH connections on this port while building).

### Building a VM with Packer
```sh
packer build -on-error=ask packer.json
```

### Packer Quirks
Looking at [the Packer template](https://gitlab.com/alexhaydock/ansible-gentoo/-/blob/master/packer.json) in this repo, you will probably find it to be a bit more rigid than Packer 'best practices'. I have to specify a VirtualBox NAT port for SSH manually, and the Ansible playbook is being run with the [local shell provisioner](https://packer.io/docs/provisioners/shell-local.html) instead of the probably more-appropriate [Ansible provisioner](https://packer.io/docs/provisioners/ansible.html).

The Ansible provisioner for Packer passes `IdentitiesOnly=yes` to the `ansible-playbook` command (to avoid SSH auth failure caused by trying every key the user might have inside `~/.ssh`). Under normal circumstances this would be sensible, but it causes problems here since we're essentially provisioning two machines. (One being the LiveCD where we connect via SSH and install Gentoo into a chroot, and the other being the installed system we then connect to continue setup.)

---

## Installing to a remote host over SSH

### Pre-reqs (remote host)
* Remote host, booted to the latest [Gentoo Minimal Installation CD](https://www.gentoo.org/downloads/).
* An ethernet connection, up and capable of DHCP.
* SSH, started and running on the Gentoo LiveCD:
  * `/etc/init.d/sshd start`
* A password set for the `root` account:
  * `passwd root`
  * If you use `root-password` as the password, this playbook will run without modification.

### Pre-reqs (local host)
* Ansible
* Local `inventory.ini` file for Ansible to use configured to use the DHCP address of our remote server.
* Edit the `group_vars/all/main.yml` file to set any variables which need setting.
  * In particular, `firmware_type` must be set to either `bios` or `efi`. Setting this wrong may leave your system unbootable or, more likely, the GRUB installation step will simply fail.

### Invoke installation with Ansible
Deploy the first stage of installation (targets the booted LiveCD) with:
```sh
make install
```

and then, once the system is installed and the remote host has rebooted:
```sh
make postinstall
```

---

## Troubleshooting

### Note on Packer and SSH client config
If you experience an error where Ansible is unable to connect, then ensure your `~/.ssh/config` is not too restrictive when it comes to key exchange algorithms and ciphers.

A resonable `~/.ssh/config` snippet for this:
```
Host 127.0.0.1
    HostKeyAlgorithms ssh-ed25519-cert-v01@openssh.com,ssh-ed25519,ssh-rsa,ssh-dss
    Ciphers chacha20-poly1305@openssh.com,aes128-ctr,aes256-ctr
```

### A note on "Distribution Kernels"
I experimented briefly with using a ["Distribution Kernel"](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/Project:Distribution_Kernel) to simplify the deployment process here. This automates a bunch of steps including building the `initramfs` that the bootloader hands off to. Unfortunately, it seems like the default config used by `sys-kernel/gentoo-kernel` when building the initramfs does not include LVM support.

Instead of taking the Distribution Kernel approach, we instead use [Genkernel](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/Genkernel) and build our `initramfs` using `genkernel --lvm --install initramfs`, which builds with LVM support and allows us to boot to a disk that is partitioned using LVM.
